---
title: Embracing the fact that I have no idea what I'm doing
draft: true
date: 2024-09-22
tags:
---
Learning to let go of having to understand everything down to the most minute detail, most likely linked to the willingness to have control over everything to be sure not to mess something up or break something and to aim to do things perfectly first try is one of the most unnerving and frustrating process I had to accept to go through in basically any domain that I am trying to learn.

Whether it's learning how to code, or how to draw, even if those are vastly different things and while in code you are bombarded with errors, logs about things not working properly after basically every single command you type when you begin doing anything, even while following step by steps tutorials, unexpected issues are going to arise, or things that are assumed to be common or basic knowledge not being covered in the tutorial par volonté to shorten things will likely come and bite your beginner ass. 
Drawing has a learning curve that's vastly different but not any less frustrating when you start off, because the 'feedback' you get just shows itself to you with each stroke of your pencil on the paper, you can just see immediately that you have done something wrong, it's not related to some kind of library issue or some syntax error, but one could argue that some prerequisites might not be present for you to be able to move forward yet just like in code.
Except those prerequisites while they can be fixed eventually with a few online searches or LLM queries with coding nowadays are only available through repetition and exercise while potentially applying a certain thing that's not innate or self-evident to you at first. Like building mind to muscle connection through your neurons to be able to control your pencil strokes in a different manner.
But the overall experience isn't any less frustrating, for someone that has grown into a world of increasingly available WhatYouSeeIsWhatYouGet tools, doing anything abstract without instantaneous or at least fairly immediate results is one of the most challenging parts of learning any skill.

Strategies that I have employed so far all involve me finding and angle to learning that skill that helps me get that quick reward and satisfaction of having a feeling of progression. As much as any learning curve isn't a straight line (mathematical curve name), it helps to cope with those times of rut when you feel stuck in a feeling of incompetance as you look back at the things that worked out.

So, while taking note of your failures/mistakes is a good thing to try and not reproduce them later on, it's equally as important to take notes of your achievements however small they may be to try and keep them as some motivation fuel to not feel utterly lost and incompetant at whatever you're learning currently.

Everyone has to start somewhere, we all know it even if sometimes we forget about it and forget that even masters were once students or beginners because we compare our current beginner self to their highest points of their art while forgetting that it took them n amount of time that's most likely impossible to quantify and may feel infinitely more than what we had for now and that's totally normal. It's always easier to read an article that tells you how to do things than actually applying it, like I would be lying if I said that I do everything I preach as some kind of infaillible machine. I think the most important thing to get is that momentum is probably the most important thing to have while being simultaneously the hardest.

I described it this way to a friend at one point: making the first move, taking the first step, moving from a state of immobility to even the smallest amount of movement requires an amount of energy that's far superior to when you're already moving.
Think of it like cars, cars use much more fuel or energy to start from a state of 0 movement to even 1. But once they're launched even if there's still friction and other physical forces that are contributing to slowing it down and make it require always some level of energy, at least it has inertia. It's the same way when you're trying to start building a habit or learning something.
You start from a state of 0 to try to get to 1, so the hardest part really is to get moving, and then once you are moving, although the hardest may feel like its been done, you still have to fuel and keep a little fire to the flame so that you don't come to a stop and have to redo the start from 0 to 1 all over again. 

Once again, no system is perfect, life happens, shit happens, so you may need to go back to what feels like square one at some point, but it won't exactly be square one, because you'll know what to do, and know it works. You know it will suck for a while, until it doesn't as much. And even if for some things it will always feel like it does no matter how far you get, if you look back at things and the progress, chances are your tolerance threshold to things has expanded without you even realizing.


Also in languages, if you ever learned another language, the barrier is the same, accepting that you cannot understand everything from the get go and try to scrape by with whatever you manage to comprehend from a conversation, at fisrt it will be 0%, then 1... then before you know it 10... and with diligence and practice and even faster if you manage to enjoy it you'll get to a 'decent' level in less time than you thought you would and not even remember how you got here.

So the TL;DR being: 
- keep moving and improving, think of what happens in a biological scale when things stop moving: they die. movement is the only constant that will help us get to where we want to go, at least if your goal is to get better at things, learn things.
- the hardest part of everything is getting started: everybody knows it, has heard or read it or been told about it at some point, yet we just don't fully integrate it until we start to embrace it by doing it through whatever we may need or want to do.
- start small, power through stuff by finding the one thing you like or the one takeaway about what you're doing that will help you like a lighthouse in a storm: a lot of the time shit can be overwhelming, too much information, too much different opinions on what you should do or not do. The right advice really is to pick something up that you feel like you may find an interest in, and always try to find a way to get something out of it that you like, otherwise -if you're like me at least- youll get discouraged fast and give up on it because you just feel lost, overwhelmed
- it's okay to be shit at something you just started doing, most of everyone is and a lot of people will just stop at that because it's too painful and bothering for them to try and power through it, either because they can't find the appeal, or they don't have the right angle to approach it. find something you manage to enjoy even if you do something that may seem shit, as long as you manage to do slightly less shitty thing after x amount of time, that's still progress, and that's the main indicator that you're moving, even if it may not be in the 'right direction', movement is the case of learning is better than being still and thinking that zero is better than one, because it's not, as much as the perfectionnist state of mind may tell you that a blank slate is 'more perfect' than one that's has a 'badly drawn figure on it', it's just your mind not liking things that are uncomfortable and trying to preserve you in the short term. But you're not here for the short term, you're here for a marathon that has its finish line constantly shifting place and moving away. Which is definitely frustrating, but the 'checkpoints' along the way tell a better story than you realize at first and you can only realize it once you look back and connect the dots, so do it whenever you can, especially when you feel frusrtated and unable to move forward, pause, take a look at how far you've come, and then be proud of it and use it as a testament of your abilty to move forward as much as you may have felt like you couldnt or didnt. 